type is something we consume in enormous
quantities much of the world it's
completely inescapable but few consumers
are concerned know where a particular
typeface came from or when or who
designed it if indeed there was any
human agency involved in its creation if
it didn't just sort of materialize out
of the software ether but I do have to
be concerned with those things it's my
job I'm one of the tiny handful of
people who gets badly bent out of shape
by the bad spacing of the T in the e
that you see there I've got to take that
slide off I can't stand it nor can Chris
good so my talk is about the connection
between technology and design of type
the technology has changed a number of
times since I started work photo digital
desktop screen web I've had to survive
those changes and try to understand
their implications for what I do for
design this slide is about the effect of
tools on form the two letters the two
K's the one on your left my right is
model made on a computer all straight
lines are dead straight the curves have
that kind of mathematical smoothness
that the Bezier formula imposes on the
right ancient gothic cut in the
resistant material of steel by hand
none of the straight lines are actually
straight the curves are kind of subtle
it has that spark of life from the human
hand that the machine or the program can
never capture what a contrast well I
tell a lie a lie at Ted I'm really sorry
both of these were made on a computer
same software same bezos same font
format the one
on your left was made by Suzanna ditch
good emigres and I did the other one the
tool is the same yet the letters are
different the letters are different
because the designers are different
that's all
Suzanna wanted her to look like that I
wanted mine to look like that end of
story
type is very adaptable unlike a fine art
such as sculpture or architecture type
hides its methods I think of myself as
an industrial designer the thing I
design is manufactured and it has a
function to be read to convey meaning
but there is a bit more to it than that
there's a sort of aesthetic element what
makes these two letters different from
different interpretations by different
designers what gives the work of some
designers sort of characteristic
personal style as you might find in the
work of a fashion designer an automobile
designer whatever there have been some
cases I admit where I as a designer did
feel the influence of technology this is
from the mid-60s the change from metal
type to photo hot to cold this brought
some benefits but also one particular
drawback a spacing system that only
provided 18 discrete units for letters
to be accommodated on I was asked at
this time to design a series of
condensed sans-serif types with as many
different variants as possible within
this 18 unit box quickly looking at the
arithmetic I realized I could only
actually make three of related design
here you see them in Helvetica
compressed extra compressed and ultra
compressed this rigid 18 unit system
really boxed me in it kind of determined
the proportions of the design here are
the typefaces at least the lower cases
so do you look at these and say poor
Matthew he had to submit to a problem
and by god it shows in the results I
hope not if I were doing the same job
today instead of having 18 spacing units
I would have
1,000 clearly I could make more variance
but would these three members of the
family be better it's hard to say
without actually doing it but they would
not be better in the proportion of a
thousand to 18 I can tell you that my
instinct tells me that any improvement
would be rather slight because they were
designed as functions of the system they
were designed to fit and as I said type
is very adaptable it does hide its
methods all industrial designers work
within constraints this is not fine art
the question is does a constraint force
a compromise by accepting a constraint
are you working to a lower standard
I don't believe CERN I've always been
encouraged by something that Charles
Eames said said he was conscious of
working within constraints but not of
making compromises the distinction
between a constraint and a compromise is
obviously very subtle but it's very
central to my attitude to to work
remember this reading experience the
phone book I'll hold the slide so you
can enjoy the nostalgia this is from the
mid seventies early trials of Bell
Centennial typeface I designed for the
u.s. phone books and it was my first
experience of digital type and quite a
baptism designed for the phone books as
I said to be printed at tiny size on
newsprint on very high speed rotary
presses we think that was kerosene and
lamp black this is not a hospitable
environment for a typographic designer
so the challenge for me was design type
that performed as well as possible in
these very adverse production conditions
as I say we were in the infancy of
digital type I had to draw every
character by hand on quadrille graph
paper there were four weights of Bell
Centennial pixel by pixel then encode
the raster line by raster lines keyboard
it took two years but I learned a lot
these letters look as they have been
chewed by the dog or something rather
but the missing
pixels at the intersections of strokes
or in the crotches are the result of my
studying the effects of ink spread on
cheap paper and reacting revising the
font accordingly these strange artifacts
are designed to compensate for the
undesirable effects of scale and
production process at the outset AT&T
had wanted to set the phone books in
Helvetica but as my friend Erik
Spiekermann said in the Helvetica movie
if you've seen that the letters in
Helvetica were designed to be as similar
to one another
as possible this is not the recipe for
legibility at small size it looks very
elegant up on our slide I had to
disambiguate these forms of the figures
as much as possible in Bell Centennial
by sort of opening the shapes up as you
can see in the bottom part of that slide
so now we're on to the mid 80s the early
days of digital outline fonts vector
technology there was an issue at that
time with the size of the fonts the
amount of data that was required to
define and store a font in computer
memory it limited the number of fonts
you could get on your typesetting system
at any one time I did an analysis of the
data and found that a typical serif you
see on the Left needed nearly twice as
much data as a sans serif in the middle
because of all the points required to
define the elegantly curved serif
brackets the numbers at the bottom of
the slide by the way are the they
represent the amount of data needed to
store each each of the fonts so the sans
serif in the middle sans the seraphs was
much more economical 81 to 150 won a ha
I thought the engineers have a problem
designer to the rescue I made a serif
type you see it on the right without
curved serifs
I made them polygonal at a straight line
segments chamfered brackets then look as
economical in data as a sans serif
that's we call it Charter on the right
so I went to the head of engineering
with my numbers and I said proudly I
have solved your problem oh he said what
problem and I said well you know the
problem of the huge data you require for
serif fonts and so on oh he said we
solved that problem last week we wrote a
compaction routine that reduces the size
of all fonts by an order of magnitude
you can have as many fonts on your
system as you like well thank you for
letting me know I said foiled again I
was left with a design solution for a
non-existent technical problem but here
is where the story sort of gets
interesting for me I I didn't just throw
my design away in a fit of pique I
persevered what had started as a
technical exercise became an aesthetic
exercise really in other words I had
come to like this typeface forget its
origins screw that I like the design for
its own sake the simplified forms of
Charter give it a sort of plain-spoken
quality and unfussy spareness that sort
of pleased me you know at times of
technical innovation designers want to
be influenced by what's in the air we
want to respond we want to be pushed
into exploring something new so charter
is a sort of parable for me really in
the end there was no hard and fast
causal link between the technology and
the design of charter had really
misunderstood the technology the techno
technology did suggest something to me
but it did not force my hand and I think
this happens very often you know
engineers are very smart and despite
occasional frustrations because I'm less
smart I've always enjoyed working with
them and learning from them apropos in
the mid-90s I started talking to
Microsoft about screen fonts up to that
point all the fonts on screen had been
adapted from previously existing
printing fonts of course but Microsoft
foresaw correctly the the movement that
stampede towards electronic
communication
to reading and writing on screen with
the printed output as being sort of
secondary important but in importance so
the priorities were just just tipping at
that point they wanted a small core set
of fonts that were not adapted but
designed for the screen to face up to
the problems of screen which were their
coarse resolution displays I said to
Microsoft a typeface designed for a
particular technology is a self
obsoleting typeface I designed too many
faces in the past that were intended to
mitigate technical problems thanks to
the engineers the technical problems
went away so did my typeface it was only
a stopgap Microsoft came back to say
that affordable computer monitors with
better resolutions released a decade
away so I thought well you know a decade
that's not bad that's that's more than a
stopgap so I was persuaded I was
convinced and we went to work on what
became vadhana and Georgia for the first
time working not on paper but directly
on to the screen from the pixel up at
that time screens were binary a pixel
was either on or it was off here this
you see the outline of a letter that
cabbage which is the thin black line the
contour which is how it is stored in
memory superimposed on the bitmap which
is the gray area which is how it's
displayed on the screen the bitmap is
rasterized from the outline you know
here in a cafe which is all straight
lines the two are in almost perfect sync
on the Cartesian grid not so with an O
this looks more like bricklaying than
type design but believe me this is a
good bitmap o for the simple reason
that's symmetrical in both x and y axes
in a binary bitmap you actually can't
ask for more than that you know I would
sometimes make I don't know three or
four different versions of a difficult
letter like a lowercase a and then stand
back to choose which was the best
well the
was no best so the designers judgment
comes in in trying to decide which is
the least bad is that a compromise not
to me if you are working at the highest
end of the technology will allow
although that standard may be well short
of the ideal you may be able to see on
this slide two different bitmap fonts
there the the a and the upper one I
think is better than the a and the lower
one but it's still ain't great you can
maybe see the effect better if it's
reduced maybe not so I'm a pragmatist
not an idealist out of necessity for a
certain kind of temperament there is a
certain kind of satisfaction in doing
something that cannot be perfect but can
still be done to the best of your
ability here's the lowercase H from
Georgia italic the bitmap looks jagged
and rough it is jagged and rough but
that I discovered by experiment that
there is an optimum angle for of slant
for an italic on a screen so the strokes
break well at the pixel boundaries look
in this example how rough as it is how
the left and right legs actually break
at the same level that's that's a
victory that's that's good right there
and of course at the lower depths you
don't get much choice this is an S in
case you were wondering well it's been
18 years now since verdana and georgia
were released Microsoft were absolutely
right it took a good 10 years but screen
displays now do have improved spatial
resolution and very much improved
photometric resolution thanks to 80
anti-aliasing and so on so now that
their mission is accomplished has that
meant the demise of the screen fonts
that I designed for coarser displays
back then will they outlive the
now-obsolete screens and the flood of
new web fonts coming onto the market or
have they established their own sort of
evolutionary
which that is independent of technology
in other words have they been absorbed
into the typographic mainstream I'm not
sure but they've had a good run so far
hey eighteen is a good age for anything
with present-day rates of attrition so
I'm not complaining thank you
[Applause]